PSN#:WEAP006 at ICALEPCS'01



CONTROL SYSTEM OF THE BEPCII

J. Zhao, C.H. Wang, X.C. Kong, G. Lei, S.F. Xu, Q. Le
IHEP Beijing, 100039 P.R. China

Abstract beam feedback system. The design goal of the BEPCII
Recently the Chinese Academy of Sciences has is in table1.
chosen BEPCII as the future development of the BEPC, Table1 The design goal of the BEPCII
i.e. upgrade of both the machine and detector. The Beam Energy range 1- 2.8GeV
luminosity of the machine is expected to increase to Beam energy 1.55 GeV
1.0x1033cm-2s-1. The project will be started at the Beam current 1.116A
beginning of 2002 and finished with in 3-4 years. The
BEPC control system was built in 1987 and upgraded 1.0x1033 cm-2s-1
Luminosity @1.55GeV
in 1994. According to the design of the BEPCII, a Injection from linac Full energy injection
double ring schema will be adopted and a number of
new devices will be added in the system. The existing 250ma @ 2.5GeV
Dedicated SR operation
control system has to be upgraded. The BEPCII will be 150mA @ 2.8GeV
distributed architecture and developed by EPICS. We
are going to apply the standard hardware interfaces and 2 CURRENT SYSTEM
mature technologies in the system. A number of VME The current control system of the BEPC was built in
IOCs will be added in the system and the feildbus, 1987, which was transferred from SLAC New Spear
PLCs will be used as device control for some kind of system and upgraded in 1994. A VAX4500 computer
equipment. We will keep the existing system in use, with the CAMAC hardware controls most of the
such as CAMAC modules and PC front-ends, and equipment on the storage ring, such as the magnet
merge it into EPICS system. Recently the development power supplies, the RF cavities and the vacuum
of the prototype is in progress. This paper will describe equipment. There are about 300 CAMAC modules and
the system design and development issues. 4,000 channels in the system. Several sub-control
systems are PC based system including the beam
1 PROJECT OF BEPCII diagnostic system, the injection power supply and the
linac system. Two VAX workstations serve as the
The Beijing Electron Positron Collider (BEPC) was console and all of the machines are connected with
constructed for both high energy physics and synchro- 100Mbps Ethernet. On the software side, the system is
tron radiation researches. BEPC accelerators consist of an in-house made database driven system. And the
a 202 m long electron-positron linac injector; a storage
ring with a circumference of 240.4 m, and in applications for accelerator operation with its OPI are
connection with each other, 210 m transport lines. closely linked to the real-time database. However, the
There are two interaction points on the storage ring, accelerator commissioning model of the BEPCII is
and a detector, the Beijing Spectrometer. The Beijing different from BEPC, so the accelerator commissioning
Synchrotron Radiation Facility has 9 beamlines and 12 programs have to be transferred and modified from
experimental stations. As an unique e+,e- collider other laboratories. In this case, the existing real-time
operating in the t-charm region and the first SR source database does not match the new transferred
in China, the machine has been well operated for over applications and the old OPI written by FORTH
10 years since it was put into operation in 1989. language will not be used in future. The control system
To upgrade the BEPC, known as BEPCII, i.e. has to be upgraded.
increasing its luminosity to 1.0x1033cm-2s-1 with the When the system upgrade, we will utilize the existing
major upgrades in both machine and the detector. equipment of the system, such as the CAMAC modules
Running at the resonance peaks of J/y and y', the and PC based subsystems. The standard hardware
BEPCII could provide data samples of J/y and y interfaces should be applied in the system so that it
with good statistics for many important physics.[1] To could be an open and standard system. With regard to
reach the goal of the higher luminosity, the double ring the software development environment, the EPICS will
schema will be adopted and many new equipment will be a good choice for it is a mature software package
be installed in the BEPCII, such as superconducting RF
cavities, superconducting magnets, new BPMs and




and widely used in the world. The cost-performance of presentation layer, process control layer and device
the system should be considered for the limited budget. interface layer [3].
As shown in Figure 1, several PCs, the cost-effective
3 SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT equipment, and SUN workstations will be used as
operator console at the presentation layer with the
3.1 Software Engineering EPICS/OPI, which is a friendly graphic man-machine
interface. There is a server machine in the top layer
Project management is very important for the installing Oracle database, which provides data logging
development of a control system. The BEPCII control and analysis service, the accelerator commissioning
system has to be delivered on time and within the support, and general computing resources.[4]
budget and it should meet the requirement of
accelerator physicists. The standard of software con
co s
n o
s l
o e
le
engineering will be used in the project, which is based
on software life cycle reference model. It includes
several phases: the user requirement phase, system
analysis and software requirement analysis, system LAN
LAN

design, coding and testing, installation and put into VME I
VME O
I C
OC VME I
VME O
I C
OC VME
VM I
E O
I C
OC PCs
PC
s
operation. The documentation and review for the major EP
E I
P C
I S/
C PCA
S/ S
PCAS
phases will be done. A software tool "Project 2000"
will be used to manage the project BEPCII. And we are
going to produce Chinese template of the documents CAM
CA A
M C
AC us
I/O
I/O

for the project management that will be used by our eld bFi I/O
I/O
users and developers.
Now the user requirement phase is in progress. A
detailed system design will be delivered in next March, Figure1 System architecture
and a prototype of the control system will be built at In the process control layer, the PowerPC micro-
same time. From beginning of 2003 we will spend two processors running VxWorks operating system will be
years for system construction, and one year for system used as EPICS IOCs. In some existing subsystems the
installation. We hope the BEPCII will finish its' PCs are still used as the front-ends. The VAX4500
commissioning in December of 2006. computer will be eliminated. The majority real-time
3.2 Development Tool tasks will run on the front-ends and the raw data are
stored in the IOC real-time database. The standard
To develop a large scale control system, a SCADA 100Mbit/sec switch Ethernet with TCP/IP protocol is
(Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition) tool kit used as a LAN, which provides access to the distributed
should be used. Currently there are many commercial computers.
SCADA products in the world market and most of them The device interface layer provides interface to the
are running on the PC and Windows NT platform, hardware, either as separate modules or as intelligent
which mainly support PLC hardware. The EPICS can controllers. The fieldbuses will serve data exchange
be considered a non-commercial SCADA tool, which with PLCs, intelligent controllers, and remote I/O
was first developed by LANL and ANL and it is widely modules.
used in the accelerator area. We are going to integrate
the BEPCII control system by the EPICS after 5 SUBSYSTEMS
evaluating the commercial SCADA products and
EPICS [2]. The benefit of using EPICS is that a lot of There are seven subsystems in current BEPC
applications for accelerator commissioning could be control system: the magnet power supply system in the
shared, it strongly supports the VME hardware and it is storage ring and the transport lines, the radio frequency
easy to get technical support from many HEP institutes system, the vacuum system, the injection system, the
in the world, such as KEK-B, SLAC, APS, LANL and beam diagnostic system and the linac system.
BESSYII. Some independent and slow control system To upgrade the control system and meet the
could be developed by a commercial SCADA product. requirement of the BEPCII, the new parts of the system
will be built with EPICS and some existing parts should
4 SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE be merged into the EPICS system. (See figure1)
The BEPC has a single ring and the BEPCII will
The BEPCII control system will adopt a distributed adopt double ring schema to obtain higher luminosity.
architecture, called "standard model". Logically, the The number of the magnet power supplies will be
system is structured with three levels, which are increased on the storage ring (see Table2) and the




superconducting RF cavities, new BPMs and beam store static and dynamic data including system
feedback system will be added in the BEPCII. These configuration data, machine parameters, historical and
equipment will be controlled by tens EPICS IOCs alarm data etc. And both of the two databases provide
which consists of VME crates, PowerPCs, DSPs and user interface on the Web page and publish the running
VME I/O modules. information. The first thing for us is to make signal
Table2 Number of magnet power supplies on SR naming convention used in the databases and create the
database structures.
Power supply for BEPCII BEPC
Bending magnets 6 1 8 TIMING
SYSTEM
Quadruple magnets 144 21
Correctors 160
64
The timing system is to synchronize all of the
Superconducting Mag. 10 0 relevant components in the accelerator of the BEPCII
Sextuple magnets 4 4 complex. Since the RF frequency of the BEPCII will be
The vacuum equipment and magnet power supplies changed from 200MHZ to about 500MHZ, so the
of Linac accelerator will be controlled by PLCs and current timing system has to be upgraded. Except the
remote I/O modules, which are connected to the EPICS hardware based fast timing system, the software based
IOCs via feildbus. The ControlNet, CANbus are the timing system might be considered in some synchro-
candidate of the feildbuses.[5] nization area.
There are several PCs for beam diagnostic system
running applications developed by Labview. The 9 CONCLUSION
EPICS/PCAS will be installed on these PCs to merge
the existing system to EPICS system. The project BEPCII will be started next year. In
Some parts of the control system still use CAMAC order to build the control system with EPICS and
I/O modules. We are going to add VME IOC in the develop basic applications, a prototype system should
local control area and connect the CAMAC system to be created firstly. After making a great effort, we think
EPICS system with VME-CAMAC interfaces. the upgraded system can meet the physical requirement
Regards some slow controls, such as cooling water of the BEPCII and it will be an advanced, flexible and
system, we are going to develop the independent reliable system.
system with commercial SCADA products, because it
supports PLCs, various sensor and controllers with 10 ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
industrial standards.[6]

6 APPLICATIONS The authors would like to thank all of the people and
friends who have given us a lot of helps and advices in
the system design stage.
There are two kinds of applications in the system.
One is application of device control; the other is REFERENCES
application for accelerator commissioning. For the
device control, we have to configure our own IOC [1] "Feasibility Study Report on BEPCII ", Edition1,
database firstly. If need, there are some I/O drivers IHEP April 2001
have to be developed for the special hardware interface. [2] "EPICS Release R3.14", APS Argonne.
The graphic man-machine interface will be developed [3] Tadahiko Katoh, "Design and Construction Acce-
by EPICS tool DM2K. A lot of applications for device lerator Control System" KEKB control group, 28
control should be developed by EPICS tools or written Aug. 2000.
with C/C++, Tcl/tk or SNL language of EPICS. The [4] J.Zhao et al, "Preliminary Design of the Control
accelerator commissioning software is considered to System for SSRF and BTCF" ICALEPCS'97
transfer from other laboratories, such as KEK-B or p56 ­ p58, Nov. 1997 Beijing, China.
PEP-II and it has to be modified based on the physical [5] http://www.sns.bnl.gov/epics/cnet/
requirement of the BEPCII. [6] A. Daneels , W. Salte "What is SCADA"
ICALEPCS'99 p339-343 Oct. 1999 Trieste, Italy.
7 DATABASES

There are two kinds of database in the system, one is
a distributed real-time database running in EPICS IOCs
to store raw data; the other is a relational database
Oracle, which will be installed on a server machine to



