PSN#TUAP059


MAIN INJECTOR LCW (Low Conductivity Water) CONTROL SYSTEM

K. C. Seino, FNAL, Batavia, IL 60510, USA



Abstract The modules are DIN rail mountable for
There are six service buildings uniformly spaced instantaneous installations, and they can be removed
along the perimeter of MI (Main Injector). A total of from their wiring bases for easy installation and
18 LCW pumps were installed around the MI ring maintenance. Moreover, every module is isolated
with 3 pumps per building. Approximately 8,000 from a common bus and other modules for fault-free
GPM of LCW is required to cool magnets, bus and operations.
power supplies in the MI enclosure and service
buildings. In each service building, a PLC control 1.2 Instrumentation
system controls pumps and valves, and it monitors
pressures, flow, resistivities and temperatures. The The sensors, transmitters, local indicators, actuators
PLC hardware system consists of a Gateway module and other field devices had been specified, purchased
and a variety of I/O modules, which are made by and installed by the Mechanical Support group.
Sixnet of Clifton Park, NY. The control system However, we did cabling/wiring, set key parameters,
communicates with other buildings including MCR calibrated, did some adjustments and did trouble-
(Main Control Room) via an Ethernet link and front- shooting on these field devices. For this reason, I will
end computers. For more details of the MI LCW briefly make reference to them as follows.
control system, refer to [1] and [2]. One of the key
elements of the PLC software is called ISaGRAF (1) Pressure Transducers (Measurement Specialties
workbench, which was created by CJ International of MSP-400-P-0064A, 0-400 psig), (2) Flow
Seyssins, France. The workbench provides a Transmitters (Peek Measurement 2120R, 0-100
comprehensive control-programming environment, GPM), (3) Differential Pressure Transmitters
where control programs can be written in five (Rosemount 2024), (4) Liquid Level Indicators
different languages. For more details of ISaGRAF, (Gems SureSite 86158), (5) Resistivity Meters
refer to [3]. (Thornton 200CR, 0.0013-50 Mohm-cm with 0.1
constant cell), (6) RTD Probes (Devar #RTDSF2.5),
1 HARDWARE (7) Electric Valve Actuators (Keystone EPI-13, 1/4
turn (close/open)), (8) Electric Valve Actuators for
1.1 PLC Temperature Regulation (EIM 2000 M2CP, 1/4 turn
(continuous)), and (9) Controller for EIM2000 above
The PLC hardware system consists of a Gateway (Powers 535, PID control).
module (local controller/remote communicator) and a
variety of I/O modules. The product line of these 1.3 Cables
modules is called as Sixtrak and is made by Sixnet of
Clifton Park, NY. The Gateway module can be The cables were pulled in MI<10:50>, 52 & 60 in
connected up to 20 I/O modules without expander 10/97 and 11/97. Since then, we had spent about ten
modules, and it can be connected up to 128 I/O months on an inconstant basis to terminate the cables,
doing tests and fixing problems on the cables, the
modules with expanders. The Gateway scans I/O instrumentation and the PLC hardware for a total of
modules and updates the information on them under a nine systems excluding one for CUB.
program control, and it communicates with host We used several different types of cables -- (a)
computers via an Ethernet link. The Gateway has 1 Belden #8761 for general use, (b) Belden #8719 for
Mbytes of flash memory (for firmware), 256 Kb of high voltage, (c) Belden #9533 for RTD, (d) Belden
battery backed RAM (for data), a real time clock and #9886 for 450 FT travel from MI-40 service building
a RS232 serial port for local diagnostics. to Beam Dump, (e) Belden #8760 for Beam Dump, (f)
For our applications, we are using several different Omega KK-J-20 for Type-J TCs (thermocouples) and
types of I/O modules. They are analog input modules (g) Omega KK-K-20 for Type-K TCs.
(4-20ma input, instrumentation and RTD), analog
output modules, digital input modules (5VDC and 2 SOFTWARE
24VDC) and digital output modules (relay).




created in the dictionary. The Sixtags utility (a shared
2.1 Sixnet Plant Floor tag database): The I/O and module tag names that are
created in the Plant Floor configuration can be
Plant Floor is a configuration and maintenance tool exported to the dictionary of an ISaGRAF project by
for Sixtrak I/O systems. Using Plant Floor's windows the Export command of Sixtags.
and menus, one assembles a graphic representation of The ISaGRAF I/O simulator can be run by clicking
on Simulate in the Debugger menu. The simulator
each I/O system. Configuration choices let him allows us to try out a program before it is run on a live
customize each module in a given system. Once a system. This convenient tool saves time by
system configuration is complete, the configuration is discovering problems and fixing them before a real
downloaded to the Gateway module of the system. start-up. I/O variables can be locked (disconnected)
Plant Floor is also a calibration tool for analog I/O from their corresponding external devices. Once they
modules, and it provides real-time displays for the are locked, their status/values can be altered by the
maintenance and diagnostics on I/O modules. debugger to proceed with the simulation.
Fig. 1 shows an example of the sequential program.
2.2 ISaGRAF For further details on ISaGRAF, one should refer to
Ref. [1].
ISaGRAF is a comprehensive control-programming
environment that makes Sixtrak I/O a high 2.3 Interlocks/Trips
performance, yet inexpensive controller. ISaGRAF
uses standard industrial PLC programming



A number of analog and digital signals are
methodologies for designing powerful applications examined on the LCW control systems, and if certain
without the need of high-level computer languages. conditions exist, the programs use them to interlock
ISaGRAF is created by CJ International of Seyssins, the pump/valve operations. For each of the above
France, and it is sold by Sixnet as a part of the Sixnet analog signals, upper and lower trip limits are
software package. specified, and if the signal exceeds these limits, the
An ISaGRAF project is a collection of individual program interlocks the related devices.
programs and functions that form a complete control At two times (Start-up and Run times), conditions
application. Each program controls one particular are tested. At the start-up time, if certain conditions
part of the application. In February 1993, responding exist, the LCW pumps can not be turned on by the
to the need for standards to reduce training costs and console command, and the trips are set true. In this
guarantee portability, the IEC issued the IEC 1131-3 situation, the operator firstly removes the conditions
standard: a specification of five PLC languages that and clears the trips. Secondly he sends the second
can be mixed in the same application. The five command from the console to turn on the LCW
languages are (a) Sequential Function Chart (SFC), pumps, because the first command has been cleared
(b) Function Block Diagram (FBD), (c) Ladder when the trips occurred.
Diagram (LD), (d) Structured Text (ST) and (e) During the run time, if certain conditions occur, the
Instruction List (IL). LCW pumps are turned off, and the trips are set true.
In this situation, the operator follows the same
An ISaGRAF project consists of programs, sub- procedure mentioned above.
programs and functions, which are placed in four
different sections as follows. There are two special rules to observe. One is
(1) Beginning: Programs in this section are 'Initial 15 sec Delay'. For 15 sec after the start-up,
systematically executed in the beginning of a cycle some conditions are ignored for tripping. The other is
after updating external inputs and outputs. '15 sec Filtering'. Signals are sampled at a certain
(2) Sequential: Programs in this section are executed rate. If the conditions exist when sampled, the
confirming to the SFC rules and the implementation occurrences are counted. If the counts exceed their
on a series of steps and transitions. specified limits over the 15 sec periods, the LCW
(3) End: Programs are executed at the end of a cycle pumps are tripped off.
just before updating external outputs.
(4) Functions: Sub-programs which can be called by 2.4 ACNET Connections
programs in any of the other three sections.
The ISaGRAF dictionary is simply the collection of In each of the service buildings (MI-10, 20, 30, 40,
internal, input and output variables and defines that 50, 52 & 60), the Gateway module communicates
are used in the programs of a project. Variables and with the front-end computer of the house via an
defines are specified as Local (specific to one Ethernet link. The front-end in turn communicates
program), Global (in any program within a project) or with the console system via the Ethernet link.
Common (in any project in ISaGRAF), when they are





There are a total of 9 front-ends that handle tasks
related to the LCW controls. Some of them perform
special tasks as well as communication. The MI-60
front-end performs a number of special tasks -- (a) it
reads the status on four local valves and writes it at
CUB for MI Makeup, (b) it reads the status on M_V03 Fig. 1: Example of Sequential Program
(MI-60 Magnet V03) and writes it to all the other
locations, and (c) it reads the status of the LCW
pumps around the MI ring, examines it for a condition
(if all the pumps are off or not) and uses the result for
an action, and (d) it also writes the result to CUB.
The front-ends at MI-52, MI-60 and CUB do
calculations to convert the liquid levels to their
volume equivalents.

2.5 Console Pages

The I56 page and its subpages show all the
activities of the MI LCW system. The Global
subpage shows an overall view of the pump
status/controls, where the operator can view the status
on LCW pumps, Pond pumps, transfer pumps and
other pumps, where he can turn on pond pumps
individually, and where he can turn on LCW pumps
using a list (specifying the turn-on order and pauses
between).
Fig. 2: Graphic View of MI-10 LCW System
The MI-10 subpage shows a view of the MI-10
LCW system, which displays the status/controls on
pumps, valves and PLC, analog readings, trip flags
and limits. Fig. 2 is a graphic view of the MI-10
LCW system.

REFERENCES

[1] K. C. Seino, "Main Injector LCW Control
System", FERMILAB-TM-2085, June 1999.
[2] K. C. Seino, "CUB DI Column Control System",
FERMILAB-TM-2086, June 1999.
[3] CJ International, "ISaGRAF Version 3.00 User's
Guide", 1995.


















