Charge Conjugation and Parity Violations as a Signature for
Black Hole Formation in Hadron Collisions


Michael J. Longo


Department of Physics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1120 USA




Abstract


Black hole formation (BHF) in hadron collisions is a subject of great interest. Hard


quark-quark collisions are generally associated with the production of particles at large


transverse momenta or with high multiplicities. If BHF occurs, we might expect large


violations of baryon number, charge conjugation (C), parity (P), strangeness, isospin, etc.


in such processes. C and P have not been well tested in hadronic interactions. I propose


new tests of C and P that can be adapted to a variety of BHF scenarios. These may


provide more sensitive searches for BHF or other new physics at existing colliders.




Black hole formation in hadron collisions is a subject of great current interest.1, 2


Speculation about catastrophic black hole formation at colliders has even appeared in the


popular press.3 Though the possibility of such a spectacular signature as destroying the


Earth has largely been disproved,4 more subtle signals of black hole formation in hadron


collisions have proven to be elusive.





Most of the recent discussion of BHF has been in the context of the CERN Large Hadron


Collider, though potentially observable rates could occur at the Fermilab Tevatron if the


fundamental gravity scale is below 1.4 TeV.5 The proposed signatures for BHF range


from lepton production at large transverse momenta2 to the presence6 (or absence7) of


multijet events with large transverse momenta, as well as the presence1 (or absence8) of


large missing energy. The formation of a quark-gluon plasma decaying into thousands of


photons has also been suggested9. No experimental evidence of BHF has yet been found,


but it is important to explore all possible signatures.





It has long been believed that only quantum numbers and symmetries that are associated


with long-range fields are preserved in black hole formation.10 Thus charge, angular


momentum, and mass are presumed to be conserved, while baryon number and lepton


number, as well as charge conjugation, parity, isospin, strangeness and other quantum


numbers that are believed to be conserved only in hadronic interactions, can be expected


to show large violations if BHF and subsequent decay by Hawking radiation11 occurs in


hadron collisions. Here I discuss how such signatures of black hole formation might


manifest themselves and how they might best be observed (or perhaps might already have


been observed).





Black hole formation is presumed to occur in the most violent quark-quark collisions.


Thus the most promising venue for finding BHF before the CERN LHC is the Fermilab


Collider. Because hard quark-quark collisions are generally associated with the


production of particles at large transverse momenta or with high multiplicities, if BHF


occurs we might expect large violations of baryon number, charge conjugation,


strangeness, isospin, etc. in such processes. While violations of baryon or lepton number


conservation would be a very dramatic signature, as a practical matter all the existing


collider detectors have large uninstrumented regions where most of the particles from


interactions are lost. This limitation, as well as the lack of particle species identification


except for low momentum particles, makes tests via baryon/lepton number conservation,


strangeness, etc. impractical.





One promising method to search for BHF appears to be testing charge conjugation (C) in


hadronic interactions at large momentum transfers. Ironically, there have been very few


tests of C in strong interactions generally,12 and none at large momentum transfers or


collider energies. This is surprising as a p-p collider with charge conjugate particles of


equal momentum in the initial state is an ideal laboratory for testing C invariance.





An immediate prediction of C invariance is that the spectrum of any charged particle in


the forward p hemisphere should be identical to that of the charge conjugate particle in


the forward p hemisphere. This can be tested in a collider detector with a magnetic


field, even without particle identification. The only relevant data appear to be from the


CDF detector. These unpublished data from the thesis of A. Byon are reproduced in Fig.

1. In this figure the pseudorapidity h q
-log , so that h = 0 corresponds to 90° with
e(tan )
2



respect to either beam. Thus the expectation of charge conjugation is that the positive


and negative distributions should be mirror symmetric about h = 0. Unfortunately, the

numerical data are no longer available, but a careful evaluation of the graphed data shows


no sign of any C-violating asymmetry. However, it should be noted that these data are at


low transverse momentum, p TM
t 1 GeV/c, so are not a good test for BHF. A careful test


should be done with high pT particles and would require corrections for apparent C

violations due to weak decays, such as L p + p­, which generally show large C

violations.





Figure 1 Distribution of positive and negative particles from central collisions in the

CDF detector from the thesis of A. Byon. h q
-loge(tan ) Charge conjugation
2


requires that they be mirror symmetric about hh
hh = 0.



Large parity violations might also occur due to BHF. This could be tested by searching


for parity-violating spin components of hyperons such as s p where p is the vector

momentum of the hyperon. The large asymmetry in L0 hyperon decays makes this a

particularly attractive possibility for a sensitive search for BHF. In this search one can


choose whatever sample of events that are most likely to be associated with BHF, such as


high multiplicity, high (or low) transverse momentum, high (or low) missing energy, etc.


Another possibility is to look for parity-violating correlations such as a term

p · , where p
1 (p2 p3 ) 1, p2, p3 . . . are any combination of beam particle, lepton, photon,


W±, Z0, high pT particle, or jet momenta.13 Again, a variety of event types and

correlations can be looked at to investigate a variety of BHF scenarios.





BHF would also presumably lead to violations of CP, T, and possibly CPT. The mirror


symmetry of charged particle production discussed above as a test of C is also required


by CP. Though violations of causality and CPT might be considered the holy grail of


BHF, it is not obvious how to test these. It is not possible to test for isospin violations


due to BHF directly. However, if BHF does occur, there is no constraint on isospin in


the final state, so that large fluctuations in the ratio of charged to neutral pions might be


expected. Such fluctuations have been observed in cosmic ray events ("Centauro" and


"anti-Centauro" events with few p0 and mostly p0, resp.).14 These could be a signal for

BHF, though many other interpretations have been suggested.14





Tests of C and P at large pT from electron-positron collisions are also of interest. The

apparent absence of electric dipole moments of the electron and neutron12 are excellent


tests of P in electromagnetic interactions. Tests of C in electromagnetic interactions


have been made12 by searching for C-violating decays of low-mass particles such as


h0 p0 + m+ + m-, but no tests of C or P have been made at colliders at large transverse

energies.





I conclude that violation of discrete symmetries, such as C and P, may be the best


"smoking gun" signature of black hole formation in hadronic interactions. Relatively


straightforward experimental tests are possible, very few of which have been done. In any


case, these symmetries have never been tested at large transverse momenta, and large


violations could occur from black hole formation or other "new physics". Causality and


CPT violation could also occur, though it is not clear how these would manifest


themselves or be tested for. If BHF can be identified and their properties studied through


their violations of symmetries and conservation laws, it will provide a long sought


connection between quantum mechanics and general relativity. Copious production of


black holes is predicted at the LHC; they may already be produced at observable rates at


the Fermilab Tevatron if more sensitive tests are done.




1 P. Argyres, S. Dimopoulos, and J. March-Russell, Phys. Lett. B441, 96 (1998).

2 S. Dimopoulos and G. Landsberg, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 161602 (2001).

3 "Big Bang Machine Could Destroy Earth", London Sunday Times, July 18, 1999.

4 R. Jaffe, W. Busza, and F. Wilczek, Rev. Mod. Phys. 72, 1125 (2000).

5 M. Bleicher et al., e-Print Archive:  Dec. 2001.

6 S. Giddings and S. Thomas, Phys. Rev. D65, 056010 (2002).

7 S. Hofmann et al., e-Print Archive:  Nov. 2001.

8 G. Landsberg, e-Print Archive:  May 2002.




9 L. Anchordoqui and H. Goldberg, e-Print Archive:  Oct. 2002.

10 C. Misner, Gravitation (Freeman, San Francisco, 1973).

11 S. W. Hawking, Nature 248, 30 (1974).

12 Particle Data Group, Review of Particle Properties, Phys. Rev. D66, 1 (2002).

13 Careful control of biases due to geometric acceptance is necessary.

14 E. Gladysz-Dziadus, e-Print Archive:  Nov. 2001



